---
title: Setting Explicit Values for Generated Properties - EF Core
author: rowanmiller
ms.date: 10/27/2016
ms.assetid: 3f1993c2-cdf5-425b-bac2-a2665a20322b
uid: core/saving/explicit-values-generated-properties
---

# Setting Explicit Values for Generated Properties

A generated property is a property whose value is generated (either by EF or the database) when the entity is added and/or updated. See [Generated Properties](../modeling/generated-properties.md) for more information.

There may be situations where you want to set an explicit value for a generated property, rather than having one generated.

> [!TIP]  
> You can view this article's [sample](https://github.com/aspnet/EntityFramework.Docs/tree/master/samples/core/Saving/ExplicitValuesGenerateProperties/) on GitHub.

## The model

The model used in this article contains a single `Employee` entity.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Saving/ExplicitValuesGenerateProperties/Employee.cs#Sample)]

## Saving an explicit value during add

The `Employee.EmploymentStarted` property is configured to have values generated by the database for new entities (using a default value).

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Saving/ExplicitValuesGenerateProperties/EmployeeContext.cs#EmploymentStarted)]

The following code inserts two employees into the database.

* For the first, no value is assigned to `Employee.EmploymentStarted` property, so it remains set to the CLR default value for `DateTime`.
* For the second, we have set an explicit value of `1-Jan-2000`.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Saving/ExplicitValuesGenerateProperties/Sample.cs#EmploymentStarted)]

Output shows that the database generated a value for the first employee and our explicit value was used for the second.

``` Console
1: John Doe, 1/26/2017 12:00:00 AM
2: Jane Doe, 1/1/2000 12:00:00 AM
```

### Explicit values into SQL Server IDENTITY columns

By convention the `Employee.EmployeeId` property is a store generated `IDENTITY` column.

For most situations, the approach shown above will work for key properties. However, to insert explicit values into a SQL Server `IDENTITY` column, you need to manually enable `IDENTITY_INSERT` before calling `SaveChanges()`.

> [!NOTE]  
> We have a [feature request](https://github.com/aspnet/EntityFramework/issues/703) on our backlog to do this automatically within the SQL Server provider.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Saving/ExplicitValuesGenerateProperties/Sample.cs#EmployeeId)]

Output shows that the supplied ids were saved to the database.

``` Console
100: John Doe
101: Jane Doe
```

## Setting an explicit value during update

The `Employee.LastPayRaise` property is configured to have values generated by the database during updates.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Saving/ExplicitValuesGenerateProperties/EmployeeContext.cs#LastPayRaise)]

> [!NOTE]  
> By default, EF Core will throw an exception if you try to save an explicit value for a property that is configured to be generated during update. To avoid this, you need to drop down to the lower level metadata API and set the `AfterSaveBehavior` (as shown above).

> [!NOTE]  
> **Changes in EF Core 2.0:** In previous releases the after-save behavior was controlled through the `IsReadOnlyAfterSave` flag. This flag has been obsoleted and replaced by `AfterSaveBehavior`.

There is also a trigger in the database to generate values for the `LastPayRaise` column during `UPDATE` operations.

[!code-sql[Main](../../../samples/core/Saving/ExplicitValuesGenerateProperties/employee_UPDATE.sql)]

The following code increases the salary of two employees in the database.

* For the first, no value is assigned to `Employee.LastPayRaise` property, so it remains set to null.
* For the second, we have set an explicit value of one week ago (back dating the pay raise).

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Saving/ExplicitValuesGenerateProperties/Sample.cs#LastPayRaise)]

Output shows that the database generated a value for the first employee and our explicit value was used for the second.

``` Console
1: John Doe, 1/26/2017 12:00:00 AM
2: Jane Doe, 1/19/2017 12:00:00 AM
```
