---
title: Keys (primary) - EF Core
description: How to configure keys for entity types when using Entity Framework Core
author: AndriySvyryd
ms.author: ansvyryd
ms.date: 11/06/2019
uid: core/modeling/keys
---
# Keys (primary)

A key serves as the primary unique identifier for each entity instance. When using a relational database this maps to the concept of a *primary key*. You can also configure a unique identifier that is not the primary key (see [Alternate Keys](alternate-keys.md) for more information).

One of the following methods can be used to setup/create a primary key.

## Conventions

By default, a property named `Id` or `<type name>Id` will be configured as the key of an entity.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/Conventions/KeyId.cs?name=KeyId&highlight=3)]

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/Conventions/KeyTypeNameId.cs?name=KeyId&highlight=3)]

> [!NOTE]
> [Owned entity types](xref:core/modeling/owned-entities) use different rules to define keys.

## Data Annotations

You can use Data Annotations to configure a single property to be the key of an entity.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/DataAnnotations/KeySingle.cs?highlight=13)]

## Fluent API

You can use the Fluent API to configure a single property to be the key of an entity.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/FluentAPI/KeySingle.cs?highlight=11,12)]

You can also use the Fluent API to configure multiple properties to be the key of an entity (known as a composite key). Composite keys can only be configured using the Fluent API - conventions will never setup a composite key and you can not use Data Annotations to configure one.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/FluentAPI/KeyComposite.cs?highlight=11,12)]

## Key types and values

EF Core supports using properties of any primitive type as the primary key, including `string`, `Guid`, `byte[]` and others. But not all databases support them. In some cases the key values can be converted to a supported type automatically, otherwise the conversion should be [specified manually](xref:core/modeling/value-conversions).

Key properties must always have a non-default value when adding a new entity to the context, but some types will be [generated by the database](xref:core/modeling/generated-properties). In that case EF will try to generate a temporary value when the entity is added for tracking purposes. After [SaveChanges](/dotnet/api/Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.DbContext.SaveChanges) is called the temporary value will be replaced by the value generated by the database.

> [!Important]
> If a key property has value generated by the database and a non-default value is specified when an entity is added then EF will assume that the entity already exists in the database and will try to update it instead of inserting a new one. To avoid this turn off value generation or see [how to specify explicit values for generated properties](../saving/explicit-values-generated-properties.md).